[SECTION: Introduction]
More recently, the discovery of lanmodulin (LanM), a small (12 kDa) protein that is involved in lanthanide trafficking in methylotrophic bacteria, holds promise as a new ligand for process development.31 Biochemical and biophysical characterization of LanM revealed remarkable selectivity for REEs against non-REE cations, the ability to bind REEs down to pH ≈ 2.5, and uncommon robustness (relative to other proteins) to repeated acid treatment cycles.32 Despite the protein's high affinity, REE desorption can be induced by relatively mild treatments (lowering pH or common chelators like water-soluble carboxylates), allowing multiple cycles of binding and desorption. Furthermore, LanM also displayed an unusual preference toward middle−light REE over heavy REE; although modest [Kd(Dy)/Kd(Nd) ∼ 5, (Kd = dissociation constant)], such a preference might allow for efficient separation of light/heavy REE groups or even important REE pairs.31

[SECTION: Results and Discussion — Immobilization of LanM onto Agarose Microbeads]
To facilitate the application of LanM for REE recovery in a flow-through format, we immobilized a LanM variant containing a C-terminal cysteine residue with a GSG spacer (hereafter LanM) on agarose microbeads using thiol-maleimide click chemistry (Figure 1A).34,35 Compared with other immobilization strategies, such as physical binding and entrapment, site-specific covalent attachment enables a stable and surface-accessible protein display, which is desirable for repeated cycles of adsorption/desorption under harsh conditions (e.g., low pH and high ionic strength). Thiol-maleimide chemistry was pursued given the ease of encoding a terminal cysteine residue and the linkage's stability at low pH (vide infra). This construct exhibited REE binding consistent with the wild-type protein (Figure S1).

[SECTION: Results and Discussion — Immobilized LanM Retains the Ability to Bind REEs at Low pH and Is Stable for Reuse]
To test the efficacy of the immobilized LanM for REE extraction under flow-through conditions, fixed-bed columns were packed with the LanM conjugates, and influent breakthrough behavior was assessed with synthetic REE-containing solutions. Nd3+ was selected as a representative model REE due to its abundance in REE deposits and high criticality for renewable energy technologies.2 The Nd breakthrough point (at pH 5) occurred after ∼25 bed volumes, in contrast to 1 bed volume with nonconjugated agarose beads, which is due to the passage of the void volume, indicating that LanM retains high affinity for REEs upon immobilization (Figure 2A). The adsorption capacity of the LanM column was 5.77 ± 0.67 μmol/mL, which corresponds to a ∼2:1 stoichiometry of Nd per immobilized LanM.

[SECTION: Results and Discussion — Ligand Competition with Nonimmobilized LanM Reveals Potential for Intra-REE Separations]
LanM exhibits an inverse affinity trend relative to most REE ligands (e.g., diglycolamides37) with a preferential response to LREEs.38 However, despite our studies of REE extraction in solution32 and on column (vide supra), we had not yet attempted to exploit these affinity differences for intra-REE separations (vide infra). We reasoned that competition with a mild chelator with a preference for HREEs, such as citrate,39 could allow for enhanced selectivity in a desorptive process. To establish this principle, we first investigated ligand competition with nonimmobilized LanM. We took advantage of our observation that the fluorescence of the sole tyrosine residue in LanM (Y96), which is adjacent to EF hands 2 and 3, is quenched upon REE binding, which may reflect differences in solvent exposure and hydrogen bonding.31 Titrations of LanM with REE displayed a maximal change in tyrosine fluorescence at 2 equiv of REE, which was counteracted upon binding of the third equivalent (Figure 3A). Our recent work has identified EF1 as the weakest of LanM's three lanthanide binding sites; therefore, we suggest that the first two equivalents of metal bind to EF2/3, and the third equivalent (to EF1) perturbs the environment of Y96.36 This fluorescence change provides a convenient handle with which to assay conditions for REE desorption from LanM. These studies, using titrations with LanM bound to individual REEs, revealed that citrate selectively outcompeted LanM for HREEs before LREEs, as expected given LanM's apparent Kd's (Figure 3B). For example, 10 mM citrate is sufficient to fully desorb Dy from LanM, whereas Nd is still mostly bound to the protein.

[SECTION: Figure 3 caption]
Spectrofluorometric titrations of LanM. (A) Fluorometric titration of LanM (20 μM) with Nd3+, Dy3+, and Y3+, showing quenching of tyrosine fluorescence upon metal binding. (B) Desorption of LanM bound to 2 equiv of each metal using citrate, followed fluorometrically. Excitation at 278 nm, emission at 307 nm, pH 5.0. All data points represent mean ± standard deviation for 3 independent experiments.

[SECTION: References — note on source organism and original LanM characterization]
(31) Cotruvo, J. A.; Featherston, E. R.; Mattocks, J. A.; Ho, J. V.; Laremore, T. N. Lanmodulin: A Highly Selective Lanthanide-Binding Protein from a Lanthanide-Utilizing Bacterium. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (44), 15056−15061.

(32) Deblonde, G. J. P.; Mattocks, J. A.; Park, D. M.; Reed, D. W.; Cotruvo, J. A.; Jiao, Y. Selective and Efficient Biomacromolecular Extraction of Rare-Earth Elements using Lanmodulin. Inorg. Chem. 2020, 59 (17), 11855−11867.

(38) Mattocks, J. A.; Ho, J. V.; Cotruvo, J. A. A Selective, Protein-Based Fluorescent Sensor with Picomolar Affinity for Rare Earth Elements. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (7), 2857−2861.
