[SECTION: Bioinorganic chemistry — Protein discerns between rare-earth elements (introduction)]
The rare-earth elements (REEs) are indispensable for emerging technologies, yet their chemical similarities make them notoriously difficult to separate from each other. Some specialized microorganisms require REEs for growth, and have evolved biological machinery to process them¹. On page 87, Mattocks et al.² report their discovery of a rare-earth-binding protein that shows unrivalled selectivity in its affinity for members of this family of elements.

[SECTION: Discovery of lanmodulin in Methylobacterium extorquens]
However, over the past 12 years or so, REEs have been found to be essential for the biochemistry of bacteria known as methylotrophs¹. These organisms can use organic compounds that contain just one carbon atom as carbon sources for growth — a talent that requires special metabolic capabilities. The incorporation of REEs into methylotroph proteins probably provides catalytic advantages that aid this distinctive biochemistry, to the extent that some methylotrophs are incapable of growth in the absence of REEs⁵. Investigation of the metabolic capabilities of methylotrophs led to the discovery of the protein lanmodulin in the bacterium Methylobacterium extorquens⁶; the protein is probably involved in regulating REE concentrations in this organism.

Lanmodulin is small, consisting of about 112 amino-acid residues, and is unstructured in the absence of REEs. It contains four EF-hand motifs — the amino-acid sequences that are responsible for the binding of calcium ions in many proteins. Workers from the same research group as Mattocks et al. have previously determined⁷ the 3D structure of M. extorquens (Mex) lanmodulin in complex with yttrium ions using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.

[SECTION: Mex lanmodulin neodymium binding affinity]
Mattocks and colleagues now report a crystal structure of the neodymium complex of Mex lanmodulin, thereby providing a detailed view of how this protein binds to REEs. In the high-affinity metal-binding sites in the structure, neodymium is coordinated by nine oxygen atoms from the protein and by two water molecules. Five of the interactions with the protein, and both of those with the water molecules, are monodentate, but one amino-acid residue makes a bidentate interaction (it binds through two oxygen atoms). The increased number of coordinating oxygens, compared with the number observed in calcium-binding proteins, along with other structural features of Mex lanmodulin, lead to a remarkable REE-binding capability. The protein has an approximately 10⁸-fold preference for REEs over calcium, and the binding affinities for the REEs are exceptionally high — as measured by a quantity known as the apparent dissociation constant, which ranges from about 5 picomolar for the light REEs up to about 25 pM for the heavy REEs⁶; smaller constants indicate higher affinities.

[SECTION: Hans lanmodulin from Hansschlegelia quercus]
The authors also report the discovery of a lanmodulin from the methylotroph Hansschlegelia quercus, isolated from buds of the English oak tree. Known as Hans lanmodulin for short, it was identified using a bioinformatics approach in which databases of protein amino-acid sequences were searched for the characteristic clusters of sequences found in lanmodulins.

Similar to Mex lanmodulin, Hans lanmodulin folds in the presence of REEs, but it has a lower affinity for the lighter REEs (the apparent dissociation constants range from 70 to 90 pM) and a more striking difference in affinity for the heavy REEs (an almost 40-fold higher apparent affinity for the light REE lanthanum over the heavy REE dysprosium). Mattocks et al. find that this selectivity correlates with the protein's ability to form dimers when it binds to REEs: the propensity for dimerization decreases with decreasing ionic radius of the REE (that is, as the atomic mass of the REE increases).

[SECTION: Crystal structures of Hans lanmodulin with La³⁺ and Dy³⁺]
The authors obtained crystal structures of the complexes of Hans lanmodulin with lanthanum and dysprosium ions. The structure of the dimeric lanthanum complex shows that ten oxygen atoms coordinate to the metal ion in each of the three high-affinity REE-binding sites, with all ten belonging to the protein, and that four amino-acid residues are involved in bidentate interactions. In the binding site closest to the interface formed between the monomers of the dimer, the bidentate binding of two residues from one of the monomers is enforced by the presence of an arginine residue (designated Arg 100) from the other monomer. The bonds formed at the interface increase the stability of the dimeric structure. Moreover, the stabilization of the REE binding pockets reduces the rates with which bound light REE ions are released from the complex (the off rates; Fig. 1a).

The structure of the Hans lanmodulin complex with the smaller dysprosium ion shows that the distance between Arg 100 and one of the glutamate residues (Glu 91) that forms a bidentate interaction in the lanthanum complex has increased, compared with the distance in the lanthanum complex. This allows Glu 91 to rotate and become monodentate, thereby reducing the number of coordinating oxygen atoms to nine. These structural changes lower the stability of the dimer, explaining why the dysprosium complex favours a monomeric structure and enabling higher off rates for heavy REE ions (Fig. 1b).

[SECTION: Figure 1 caption]
Figure 1 | Dimerization of a lanmodulin protein determines its affinity for rare-earth elements. Mattocks et al.² report a bacterial lanmodulin protein that has about 40-fold higher affinity for ions of lanthanum (La³⁺), a light rare-earth element, than for those of dysprosium (Dy³⁺), a heavy rare-earth element. The difference in binding affinity depends on whether the protein forms dimeric complexes with the ions. a, Binding of La³⁺ favours the formation of the dimeric complex, rather than the monomeric one. Dimer formation stabilizes the protein–metal binding interactions, reducing the rate at which ions are released from the dimer (the off rate, indicated by the lower arrow in the equilibrium symbol) and increasing the binding affinity of lanmodulin for the metal ions. b, Binding to Dy³⁺ favours the formation of a monomeric complex, which has a higher off rate than in a, and a lower affinity for the metal ions.

[SECTION: Chromatographic separation application]
Chromatography techniques separate mixtures of molecules by taking advantage of differences in the binding affinities of the molecules for a separation medium. Mex lanmodulin has previously been immobilized on beads, which were then used as a medium on which to separate REEs from other metals⁹. Mattocks et al. now show that Hans lanmodulin can be used in a similar way to separate individual REEs: dysprosium and neodymium ions were separated in a single operation, yielding products with greater than 98% purity and recovering more than 99% of the material from the original mixture.
